The character of the people at the present day—a curious mixture
of stupidity, apathy, and shrewdness—seems to reflect in great
measure their past history, as well as the peculiar conditions
under which they still live. A history of the inhabitants since
the withdrawal of the Roman garrisons would resolve itself into
an account of an endless combat with Nature, which, with sand and
wind as its chief agents, has never abated its efforts to recover
those tracts which the Ancients, by the exercise of much skill and
industry, wrested from the desert.

As a member of the Geological Survey of Egypt from 1896 to 1905,
I spent nearly nine years in survey and exploration work in the
Egyptian deserts, and for the past three years I have been in
charge of extensive boring and land-reclamation operations in the
particular oasis with which this book deals, so that I have had
exceptional opportunities of studying at first hand a region of
peculiar interest. Among other questions dealt with are the vast
systems of subterranean aqueducts constructed by the Romans; the
extensive lakes which occupied the floor of the oasis-depression
well into historic times; the rate and mode of movement of desert
sand-dunes; the formation and gradual elevation of the cultivated
terraces by the constant accumulation of wind-borne material; and
the deep-seated water-supplies, a subject which, in view of recent
discussions as to the origin of the artesian waters of arid regions,
is of more than local interest.